So at this point we understand, Prim's
algorithm and we also know why it's
correct.
That is why it always computes the
minimum cost spanning tree of a graph.
So in this video, we're going to turn to
implementation issues and running time
analysis.
We'll begin by just analyzing the
straightforward implementation of Prim's
algorithm.
That's already reasonable.
It's polynomial running time, but not
especially close to linear.
Then we'll see how a suitable deployment
of heaps very much in the way that we did
for Dijkstra's algorithm leads to a
blazingly fast, near linear running time.
So let's briefly review the pseudocode
for Prim's algorithm.
Recall that Prim grows a tree one edge at
a time spanning one new vertex at each
iteration.
So it maintains two sets,
capital X, a set of vertices that have
spanned so far,
and capital T, these are the edges we've
committed to thus far.
They start out by just being some
arbitrary vertex, little s, and the empty
set, and in each iteration of this main
while-loop, we add one new edge to the
tree.
And whatever new vertex that edge spans,
we add that to capital X.
The algorithm terminates when we're
spanning all of the vertices and as we've
seen, it halts not just with a spanning
tree but with a minimum cost spanning
tree.
So suppose we just literally implemented
this algorithm as is, what would be the
running time?
Well, the initialization stick, step
takes only constant time, so let's ignore
that.
So let me just have this one loop.
So let's just ask how many iterations
does the loop take and how much time is
needed to execute each iteration?
Well, the number of loop iterations is
going to be exactly n - 1, so, where n is
the number of vertices.
X starts out with one vertex and
terminates when it has all n vertices.
How much work do we need to implement
each iteration?
Well, essentially, what each iteration is
doing is a brute-force search through the
edges.
It's looking for the edges that have one
endpoint inside X and one endpoint
outside,
and amongst those, it just remembers the
cheapest.
And it's easy to see that you could
implement each iteration in O of m time,
where M is the number of edges.
For example, you can just, with each
vertex associate a Boolean variable that
keeps track of whether or not it's in
this capital X, that way when you see an
edge, you know whether it's crossing the
frontier or not in constant time.
So putting it together, O of m iterations
with O of m works for each gives us a
running time of O of m times n.
So this running time is already nothing
to sneeze at.
As we discussed, graphs can have an
exponential number of spanning trees.
So, this algorithm is doing far less work
than examining each of these spanning
trees.
It's homing in in polynomial time, to the
minimum cost point.
So that's pretty cool.
But remember the mantra of any algorithm
designer worth their salts,
confronted with a solution, you should
always ask but can we do better?
And can we do better than running time O
of m times n?
We can as we'll see in the rest of this
video.
The big idea for speeding up Prim's
Algorithm is exactly the big idea we used
in part 1 to speed up Dijkstra's
algorithm,
namely we're going to deploy a suitable
data structure.
So, what data structure seems like it
might be a good idea for making Prim run
faster?
Well, what's happening in the main
workhorse while-loop of Prim's algorithm?
Over and over again, we keep meaning to
do a minimum computation amongst all
edges crossing the frontier, we need to
find the cheapest one.
So, the question we should ask ourselves
is what kind of data structure would
facilitate, would speed-up repeated
minimum computations.
And if you recall from part 1, we have a
data structure where that's exactly what
it's raison d'etre is, the heap,
the meaning of life for a heap is to
speed-up repeated minimum computations,
just like in Prim's algorithm.
So let me just remind you briefly, what
are the operations exported by heap data
structure and what is the running time?
So first recall that a heap contains a
bunch of objects, and each of those
objects should have some key value from
some totally ordered set, like a number,
like for example, an edge cost.
So what can you do with a heap?
Well, the salient operations for our
purposes today are, first of all, you can
insert new stuff into the heap with
their, whatever their key value is.
You can extract the object with the
minimum key value.
And you can also delete stuff from the
middle of the heap.
And all of these can be done in
logarithmic time, logarithmic in a number
of objects stored by the heap.
So it's not going to be important for us
today to know how heaps are implemented
and what they look like under the hood.
We're just going to be clients of them.
We're just going to make use of these
operations and the fact that they run in
logarithmic time.
But you know, just for those of you who
are curious, and/or want to have your
memory jogged. Under the hood, heaps are
implemented logically as complete binary
tree.
They're actually laid out in an array,
but you sort of think of them
conceptually as being in a complete
binary tree. And they, they, they satisfy
what's called the heap property. And the
heap property is to make sure that you
know where the object with the minimum
key value is.
So the actual definition is, every parent
should have a key value which is less
than that of its children.
So as you go up the tree, the key value
can only drop and that means you know
where the minimum is got to be.
It's got to be at the root of this tree
orr the front of the array.
So that's great.
That's how you locate the minimum so
quickly in a heap.
Now, what do you do when you want to
extract the minimum?
So you rip off the root of this tree,
and now, you have to rearrange the tree
to restore the heap property.
So you swap the last leaf up to where the
root was, you bubble-down as needed to
restore the heap property.
how do you insert?
You put the new object as the new last
leaf and you bubble it up as needed to
restore the heap property.
To delete from the middle of a heap, you
just sort of rip it out and then bubble
things up or down as necessary to restore
the heap property.
Again, that's not supposed to, if you're
hearing this for the first time, I know
this is too fast,
this is just to jog your memory for those
of you who already learned this in part 1
of the course.
For more details, you can go review the
appropriate videos there.
So now that I've reminded you about the
salient properties of heaps. Let's return
to the question of how do we deploy them
cleverly to speed-up Prim's algorithm.
So our intuition is that because we're
doing repeated minimum computations in
Prim's algorithm, each time that it's
while-looped, compute the cheapest edge
cross in your frontier, that's sort of in
the wheelhouse of heaps.
So how should we use heaps? Well, the
first idea, which is a pretty good idea,
is to use the heap to store edges, right?
Because our minimum computation should
result in us choosing an edge, so when we
EXTRACT-MIN from a heap, we want it to
hand us an edge on a silver platter. So
it would seem this would be your first
thought,
that the heap should store edges and that
the key value that you use should just be
the edge cost, because you want to find
the cheapest edge.
So this already a quite good idea using
heaps in this manner.
We'll already definitely speed-up Prim's
algorithm relative to the naive
implementation.
And in fact.
and I'll leave this as an exercise for
you to work out.
using heaps in this way results in an
implementation that has, that runs in
time big O of m log n.
What I'm going to show you instead is not
that implementation, but an even cleverer
implementation of Prim using heaps.
We're not going to see a benefit in the
asymptotic running time.
This more sophisticated version will also
give us m log n running time, but it
would give you better constants and it is
the version you would want to implement
in practice.
[SOUND] So, the one slightly tricky point
in this exercise is remembering Prim's
algorithm, you don't just want the
cheapest edge overall [INAUDIBLE] You
want the cheapest edge which crosses the
current cut that has one endpoint in each
of x and v - x.
And, when you use heaps in this way, it
might hand you in a silver platter and
edge which is cheap, but isn't
necessarily crossing the frontier.
So, you need some extra checks to ensure
that you're always finding the minimum
edge and that that edge crosses the
frontier between x and v - x.
So I'll leave it to you to work out the
details of this implementation in the
privacy of your own home.
What I want to spend our time together on
instead is this somewhat more
sophisticated, more practical way to use
heaps.
And for those of you who remember our
fast implementation of Dijkstra, this
will be very familiar to you.
It will be the same kinds of ideas that
we used for Dijkstra,
and the keypoint is, instead of using the
heap to store edges, were going to use it
to store vertices.
So, in a bit more detail, our plan is
going to be to maintain two invariants.
The first invariant is going to describe
what the heap contains.
The second invariant is going to be what
the key values of those heap object are.
So as I said, we're now going to be
starting at vertices in the heap, not
edges.
Which vertices?
Exactly the vertices that we don't yet
span.
The vertices of v - x.
The motivation here is that rather than
getting on a silver platter, the edge in
which to add next to the tree, we're
going to get from a heap on a silver
platter, the vertex, that we're next
going to add to capital X.
So the second invariant tells us what the
key values of these vertices in v - x are
supposed to be.
And we're going to define them to be the
cheapest cost of an edge incident of this
vertex that crosses the current frontier.
So, I think a picture will make this
definition clear.
So, consider some snapshot of Prim's
algorithm at some iteration.
We have our vertices X that were already
spanning.
We have our vertices v - x that were not
And remember, the elements of the heap by
invariant 1 are exactly the vertices on
the right-hand side,
the vertices of v - x.
So were trying to find the key value for
some vertex in the heap.
So some vertex v, which is on the right
side, which is not in x.
And so, what we do is we look at the
edges incident on this vertex v that go
back to the left-hand side,
so, edges incident to v that are crossing
the frontier and there may be of course
be many such edges.
And the invariant we want to maintain is
that the key value for this vertex V is
the cheapest of all the incident edges
crossing their frontier or in this
picture the key should be equal to two.
There is the niggling issue of how do you
define the key if there are no incident
edges at all that are crossing the
frontier.
So maybe you have a vertex w, which is
buried deep inside of v - x, and
actually, none of the incident edges go
back to the left blob at all. So in that
case we just define the key to be plus
infinity.
So given this high level approach to
implementing Prim's algorithm using
heaps, we now have a few things to think
through.
So first of all we have to think about
how to initialize the heap so that these
invariants are satisfied at the beginning
of Prim's algorithm.
Second of all, we have to check that if
these invariants are satisfied, then we
can faithfully simulate each iteration of
the while-loop in Prim's algorithm,
hopefully very quickly.
And then third, we have to think about
how do we make sure these invariants are
maintained throughout the course of
Prim's algorithm,
so let's do those in turn. So the first
thing is how do we set up the heap at the
beginning of Prim's algorithm and a
preprocessing step, so that both of these
invariants are satisfied.
Well, at the beginning,
X consists just of this single arbitrary
star vertex S.
V minus X contains the other n - 1
vertices.
The key value of a vertex other than S at
the beginning of Prim's algorithm, is
just the cheapest edge between that
vertex and S if there is one, or plus
infinity otherwise.
So, the thing to think through and make
sure you believe this, is that first of
all, with a single scan through the
edges, so an O of m time, we can compute
the key value for each vertex that needs
to go in the heap.
And then, we just have to insert those n
- 1 vertices into the heap. So that's
going to cost us O of m time for an edge
scan,
and then, m log n for the inserts.
In fact, for those of you that really
know heaps very well, you might know
about a heapify operation which allows
you to do a batch of n inserts in O of n
time because we can do this even faster
in linear time but we're not going to
need that in this lectures.
And also, I claim that this expression m
+ n log n is bounded above by the
expression m log n, at least an
asymptotic notation.
To see that, remember two things. First
of all we're assuming that the input
graph is connected, otherwise there's no
spanning trees and it's not interesting
to talk about minimum spanning trees.
Second of all, in any connected graph,
the number of edges m is at least n - 1.
So asymptotically, m is always at least
as big as n and it can be bigger. So you
can always replace an n by an m and get a
valid upper bound, so that's what we're
doing here.
The second issue we need to think through
is how do we faithfully simulates each
iteration of the while loop in Prim's
Algorithm, given that these two
invariants halt.
So this issue is going to work out
beautifully really, by construction.
We set up our heap and we set up our
definition of keys,
so that extracting min from the heap and
iteration is a faithful simulation of the
brute-force search in the naive
implementation of Prim's alogrithm.
So specifically, assuming that these two
invariants hold when we invoke
EXTRACT-MIN from this heap, what it
provides to us on a silver platter is the
next vertex,
not yet in X.
The next vertex that we should add to X
in this iteration.
And moreover, the cheapest edge incident
to that vertex crossing the frontier is
the one that we should be adding to the
set T in this iteration.
And the way to think about this fact is
to think of us as essentially simulating
the brute-force search and the naive
implementation using a 2-round knockout
tournament.
So, in the straightforward implementation
of Prim,
the way we think of it is we just do a
scan through all the edges crossing the
frontier and we remember the winner, we
remember the smallest cost of them all.
Here,
with a heap, we're doing it in two steps.
So first of all, for each vertex on the
right-hand side of the cut, for each
vertex in v - x, it locally remembers
what is its best candidate so what is the
cheapest edge incident on that vertex
crossing the frontier.
So that's kind of round one, so for an
edge to be chosen as the winner, at the
very least, it'd better be a local
winner.
It'd better be the cheapest edge crossing
the cut that ends at this particular
vertex on the right-hand side of the cut.
So that's just in a definition of the key
of each vertex and encodes the value of
the winner localed in that vertex.
And then this EXTRACT-MIN is envoking the
second round of this 2, 2-round
elimination tournament.
It's saying, well, amongst all the
proposals from the 1st round, amongst all
the crossing edges that are locally
minimum given it's endpoint, which of
them is the cheapest overall?
And that's going to be the cheapest edge
crossing this cut, the result of this
exact min computation.